Welcome back! Today we're revising Photosynthesis — how green plants make their own food.
We'll cover the four things a plant needs, the biggest traps in this topic,
and the exact phrases that score marks in Section B.
Let's start with the definition.
Memorise this word for word: photosynthesis is the process by which green plants make their
own food, using water, carbon dioxide, light and chlorophyll.
So it needs four things: water, carbon dioxide, light and chlorophyll.
And it makes two things: food, which is sugar or starch, and oxygen.
Where does each need come from? Water comes from the soil.
It's absorbed by the roots and carried up the stem to the leaves.
Carbon dioxide comes from the air, and enters the leaf through tiny holes called stomata.
Light usually comes from the Sun, and is absorbed by the chlorophyll.
And chlorophyll is already inside the leaf — it's the green substance that traps light.
Remember: take away any one of these four, and photosynthesis cannot take place.
Now the biggest trap. Plants make food — they do not absorb it!
Never write, the plant takes in food through its roots, or,
the plant gets food from the Sun.
Instead write: the plant makes its own food by photosynthesis, using water,
carbon dioxide, light and chlorophyll.
The roots absorb water and mineral salts from the soil — never food.
And light is energy, not food.
Green plants are the only living things that can make their own food.
The leaf is the plant's food factory, and it's perfectly built for the job.
It's broad and flat, giving a large surface area to absorb more light.
It's green, because it contains chlorophyll, which traps the light.
It's thin, so carbon dioxide can reach the inner cells easily.
And it has stomata, tiny holes that let carbon dioxide in and oxygen out.
Why does photosynthesis matter so much? Three reasons. One: food for everyone.
Green plants are producers — the only living things that make their own food.
Animals depend on plants, either directly by eating them,
or indirectly by eating animals that ate plants.
Two: it gives out oxygen, which all living things need for respiration, to release energy.
And three: it takes in carbon dioxide,
helping to keep the amount of carbon dioxide in the air balanced.
Now, the biggest trap in this whole topic: photosynthesis versus respiration.
Photosynthesis happens in green plants only; respiration happens in all living things — pla
nts and animals.
Photosynthesis only happens when there is light; respiration happens all the time,
day and night.
Photosynthesis takes in carbon dioxide and water, and gives out oxygen and food.
Respiration takes in oxygen and food, and gives out carbon dioxide and water.
Photosynthesis stores energy in food; respiration releases it.
So let's be very clear. In the day, plants photosynthesise and respire at the same time.
At night, there's no light, so there's no photosynthesis — plants only respire.
That means at night they take in oxygen and give out carbon dioxide.
Never write, plants only respire at night, or, plants give out oxygen at night.
Plants respire all the time. It's photosynthesis that needs light.
Let's look at experiments. If a leaf has been photosynthesising, it will contain starch.
We test it with iodine solution.
If it turns blue-black, starch is present, so photosynthesis took place.
If it stays brown, there's no starch, so photosynthesis did not take place.
Now here's a favourite question: why is the plant kept in the dark for one to two days firs
t? To remove any starch already stored in the leaves. That's called destarching.
Then any starch found afterwards must have been made during the experiment.
Here's the classic variegated leaf question.
A leaf that's green in the middle and white at the edges is tested for starch,
and only the green part turns blue-black. Why?
The model answer: only the green part contains chlorophyll to trap light,
so only it could photosynthesise and make starch.
The white part has no chlorophyll, so no photosynthesis took place there.
Another version: part of a leaf is covered with black paper for two days.
Why does the covered part stay brown? Because the black paper blocked the light.
Without light, photosynthesis could not take place there, so no starch was made.
And remember the fair test rule: change only one variable.
Keep everything else the same — the same type of plant, the same amount of water,
the same temperature, and the same leaf size.
Answering technique. Use these keywords: makes its own food.
Water, carbon dioxide, light and chlorophyll. Chlorophyll traps light.
Enters through the stomata. Gives out oxygen. Photosynthesis cannot take place.
And, producer. Then use the formulas.
For a missing need: without blank, photosynthesis cannot take place,
the plant cannot make food, so it will not have enough energy to grow and will eventually d
ie.
For light or chlorophyll: that part of the leaf has no chlorophyll, or received no light,
so photosynthesis could not take place there and no starch was made.
Time to test yourself!
Ali says, plants take in carbon dioxide and give out oxygen all the time. Is he correct?
Pause the video and try. Ready? The answer is no.
Plants only take in carbon dioxide and give out oxygen when they photosynthesise,
which needs light.
At night there is no light, so plants only respire — they take in oxygen and give out carbo
n dioxide.
Let's recap.
Photosynthesis: green plants make their own food using water, carbon dioxide,
light and chlorophyll, and it produces food and oxygen.
Water comes from the soil through the roots, carbon dioxide enters through the stomata,
and chlorophyll traps the light.
Roots absorb water and mineral salts, not food — plants make their food!
The leaf is broad and flat for a large surface area.
Remove any one need, and no food is made.
Plants respire day and night, but photosynthesis needs light.
And for the starch test: blue-black means photosynthesis took place — and destarch the plan
t first!
You've got this! Remember: plants make their own food, and they respire day and night.
Use the keywords and the answer formulas, and those Section B marks will grow.
Good luck with your revision, and all the best for PSLE!